---
layout: post
author: sanketdg
title:  "Summer of Code Week 1"
date:   2016-05-30 02:00:00 +0530
description: Week 1 updates
tag:
- gsoc
- coala
- python
comments: true
---

So as I said in my previous blog post, I am working with
[coala](http://coala-analyzer.org) for language independent
documentation extraction for this year's Google Summer of
Code.

It has been one week since the coding period has started,
and there has been some work done! I would like to explain
some stuff before we get started on the real work.

So, my project deals with language independent documentation
extraction. Turns out, documentation isn't that independent
of the language. Most programming languages don't have an
official documentation specification. But It could be said that
documentation is independent of the documentation standard
(hereby referred to as `docstyle`) it uses.

I have to extract parts/metadata from the documentation
like descriptions, parameters and their descriptions, return
descriptions and perform various analyzing routines on this
parsed metadata.

Most of my work is with the [`DocumentationComment`][class] class,
where I have to implement routines for each language/docstyle.
I started out with `python` first because of two reasons:

- Its my favourite programming language (Duh!)
- `coala` is written in `python`! (Duh again!)

So `python` has its own docstyle, that is known
as "docstrings", and they are clearly defined in [PEP 257][pep].
Note that PEP 257 is just a general styleguide on how to write
docstrings.

> The PEP contains conventions, not laws or syntax

_It is not a specifictaion_.

Several documentation tools support compiling these docstrings
into API documentation like [Sphinx] and [Doxygen].
I aim to support both of them.

So, I have come up with the following signature for `DocumentationComment`:

`
DocumentationComment(documentation, language, docstyle, indent, marker, range)
`

Now let's say `doc` is an instance of `DocumentationComment`.
`doc` would have a function named `parse_documentation()` that
would do the parsing and get the metadata. So if I have a function
with a docstring:

{% highlight python %}
>>> def best_docstring(param1, param2, param3):
        """
        This is the best docstring ever!

        :param param1:
            Very Very Long Parameter description.
        :param param2:
            Short Param description.

        :return: Long Return Description That Makes No Sense And Will
                 Cut to the Next Line.
        """
        return None
{% endhighlight %}

And I load this into the `DocumentationComment` class and then apply the parsing:

{% highlight python %}
>>> from coalib.bearlib.languages.documentation.DocumentationComment import (
    DocumentationComment)
>>> doc = DocumentationComment(best_docstring.__doc__,
                           language="python",
                           docstyle="default")
>>> docdata = doc.parse_documentation()
{% endhighlight %}

_Note: Not all parameters are required for instantation_.

Now printing `repr(docdata)` would print:

{% highlight python %}
[Desc(desc='\nThis is the best docstring ever!\n'),
Param(name='param1:', desc='    Very Very Long Parameter description.\n'),
Param(name='param2:', desc='    Short Param description.\n'),
RetVal(desc='Long Return Description That Makes No Sense'
            ' And Will\n         Cut to the Next Line.\n')]
{% endhighlight %}

You may ask about the strange formatting. That is because it retains the exact
formatting, as displayed in the docstring. This is important, because whatever
analyzing routines I run, I should always be able to "assemble" back to the
original docstring.

That's it! This was my milestone for week 1, to parse and extract metadata out
of python docstrings! I have already started developing a simple Bear, that I
will talk about later this week.

**PS: I would _really_ like to thank my mentor [Mischa Krüger][Makman2] for his thoughts
on the API design and for doing reviews on my ugly code. :P**

[class]: https://github.com/coala-analyzer/coala/blob/master/coalib/bearlib/languages/documentation/DocumentationComment.py
[pep]: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0257/
[sphinx]: http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/stable/
[doxygen]: http://www.stack.nl/~dimitri/doxygen/
[Makman2]: https://github.com/Makman2
